---
title: A Pronouncing and Defining Dictionary of the Swatow Dialect (汕頭方言音義字典) / í
p: A_Pronouncing_and_Defining_Dictionary_of_the_Swatow_Dialect/w/í
date: 2024-04-01 23:00:00
---

[↩️ 轉總目錄](/A_Pronouncing_and_Defining_Dictionary_of_the_Swatow_Dialect)


**野**
- A wilderness; a moor; savage.

- khùang-ía;

  a waste.

- suaⁿ ía kâi nâng;

  mountaineers.

- ía sèⁿ būe tṳ̂;

  his wild disposition is not yet tamed.

- ía bī;

  gamey flavor.

- ía kíaⁿ;

  a savage.

- cí kâi nâng ía căi;

  this person is very rude and fierce.

- châng ía;

  wild land.

- lông-hu ía-jîn;

  savage yeomen.

**爺**
- Sire; noblemen; divinities; officers.

- thài-îa;

  your worship, the district magistrate.

- lău-îa;

  an officer, a nobleman, or a male divinity.

- tōa îa, jī îa, sam îa;

  an officer, his servant, and servant's attendant.

- lău thài îa;

  your honor, the prefect.

- îa mn̂g;

  the servants or attachés in a yamun.

- kong îa;

  your grace, the duke.

- sṳ îa;

  a private secretary.

- a îa;

  sire; esquire.

- pài lău-îa;

  worship the gods.

- sāi lău-îa;

  set up gods.

- hĕ lău-îa;

  make known to the god.

- hŏng lău-îa;

  make offerings to a god.

**背**
- To carry on the back.

- ĭa a-nôⁿ;

  to carry a child pickback.

- i bŏi kîaⁿ, tîeh ĭa i;

  he cannot walk and must be carried pickback.

**亦**
- Also; moreover; likewsise.

- cí kâi īa hó̤;

  this also is good.

- cìeⁿ-seⁿ īa hó̤, hìeⁿ-seⁿ īa hó̤;

  either will do.

- īa sĭ bô̤ năi kâi;

  neither is it durable.

- īa màiⁿ mn̄g i;

  do not ask him either.

- cí kâi īa sĭ kun-cṳ́ nâng;

  he is likewise a cultured person.

- īa m̄ sĭ lṳ́ lâi tàⁿ, úa cĭu m̄ khéng;

  had you not come and told me, I should not have been willing.

**撒**
- To scatter; to sow broadcast.

- īa céng-cí;

  to sow seed.

- īa bí khṳt koi cîah;

  scatter some rice for the fowls to eat.

- màiⁿ īaⁿ cêk koiⁿ;

  do not scatter it all about.

- īa chek;

  to sow paddy.