---
title: A Pronouncing and Defining Dictionary of the Swatow Dialect (汕頭方言音義字典) / é
p: A_Pronouncing_and_Defining_Dictionary_of_the_Swatow_Dialect/w/é
date: 2024-04-01 23:00:00
tags: 
- 汕頭方言音義字典
---


**啞**
- Dumb.

- é nâng hàuⁿ tàⁿ ūe;

  the dumb are loquacious.

- ui lâng, ui é, ui cheⁿ-mêⁿ;

  to so cure the patient that he is deaf, dumb, and blind.

- ău sì tîeh é;

  you will be dumb in the next world, (said in scolding a great talker).

- i é sîn é kúi;

  he is a dumb fellow.

**涉**
- To wade.

- ĕ kùe khoi;

  wade across a stream.

- tìn-tang kò̤ chim, khíong-ùi ĕ m̄ kùe;

  it is deep in the middle, and I fear we cannot wade across.

- ĕ pīn sim-kuaⁿ-thâu;

  wade in up to the chest.

- kha màiⁿ ĕ cúi;

  do not step in that puddle.

- put-phû khò-kha cìaⁿ hó̤ ĕ;

  lift the bottoms of your trowsers, then you can wade.

**下**
- The next; below; under.

- ĕ chṳ̀;

  the next time.

- ĕ nî;

  the coming year.

- ĕ jît;

  some other day soon.

- táng kàu ĕ kâi gûeh;

  wait until next month.

- ĕ cūa cìaⁿ khîeh lâi;

  he will bring it the next time.

- ĕ hăng tîeh cìeⁿ-seⁿ cò̤;

  next time you must do thus.

- ĕ chut cò̤-nî cò̤?

  What is to be done next?

- ĕ pái i m̄ káⁿ;

  another time he will not do so.

- ĕ hûe, m̄ hó̤;

  do not do so again.

- ĕ sî;

  another time, hereafter.

- cīeⁿ ĕ sî cū m̄ sie tâng;

  they were not the same the last time as they were the first time.

- ĕ sî tîeh cai thóiⁿ;

  another time you must look out.

- chíu ĕ kâi nâng;

  subordinates.

- tì ĕ nâng;

  those under your control.

- kha chíu chek ĕ kâi nâng;

  dependents.

- mâk ĕ kâi kéng-khùang hó̤ mē?

  Is the immediate prospect good?

- thong thiⁿ ĕ kâi nâng;

  all people under heaven.

- lô̤h lâu ĕ;

  gone down stairs.

- pàng tŏ̤ chn̂g ĕ;

  put it under the table.

- teh tŏ̤ cí cṳ-cheh ĕ;

  put it under this book.

- khǹg tŏ̤ tû ĕ;

  hidden under the cupboard.

- ĕ chíu kang;

  the work of an apprentice.

- cīeⁿ chíu ciap ĕ chíu;

  there is no interim between the predecessor and successor.

- cīeⁿ chíu sĭ i tó̤ tīu, ĕ chíu sĭ úa tó̤ tīu;

  first he lived there, and then I did.

- ĕ pŏ;

  the lower or latter portion.

- ĕ-hâi;

  the chin.

- ăm ĕ;

  the neck, below the chin.

- kha ĕ;

  under foot.

- kha-mâk ĕ;

  the side of the foot below the ankle bone.

- ko̤h-tháng-ĕ;

  the armpit.

- kha-thâu-u ĕ;

  the kneepan.

- tó-câi ĕ;

  the abdomen.

- hîap ĕ;

  the side, below the armpit.

- cīeⁿ pńg thâk ŵn cìaⁿ thâk ĕ pńg;

  read the preceding volumes, then the succeeding.

- cīeⁿ-kùa cò̤ kàu ĕ-kùa;

  worked from forenoon till afternoon.

- cīeⁿ tǹg lâu ĕ tng;

  save the preceding meal for the succeeding one.

- cīe ūi, ĕ ūi;

  higher and lower positions.

- ko̤h ĕ;

  Your Excellency.

- cīeⁿ chíu pôiⁿ, ĕ chíu pôiⁿ;

  up and down in a landscape.

- tŏ̤ hṳ́ ĕ sì;

  down there on the lower level.

- huang ĕ pôiⁿ, huang ĕ pôiⁿ;

  to windward and to leeward.

- cīeⁿ lâu pôiⁿ, ĕ lâu pôiⁿ;

  the side from which the tide comes in, and the opposite side.

- tŏ̤ chīu ĕ la-lîang;

  under a tree, enjoying the coolness.

- cûn tùi kîe ĕ keng-kùe;

  the boat passed under the bridge.

- cōi nâng chut i kâi mn̂g ĕ;

  many have been under his instruction.

- cīeⁿ hieⁿ, ĕ hīeⁿ;

  the upper and lower villages.

- cīe în, ĕ în;

  the upper and lower tiers.

- ĕ cêk câng;

  the lowest shelf.

- ĕ câng cṳ;

  the next session.

- chah tŏ̤ i sit ĕ;

  carried under his wing.

- cīeⁿ khṳ̀, ĕ khṳ̀;

  the high and low departing tones.

- cīe phêⁿ, ĕ phêⁿ;

  the upper and lower even tones.

- pûah tŏ̤ thó ĕ;

  fell down upon the ground.

- pak ĕ;

  the belly.

- cûn pak ĕ;

  under the boat.

- suaⁿ kha ĕ;

  at the base of the hill.

**下**
- A stroke; a time.

- cêk ē;

  all together.

- cêk ē cêk ē;

  stroke by stroke.

- úa thiaⁿ i phah cêk ē cêk ē hīn-hīn;

  I heard the blows distinctly.

- ceng híang kúi ē?

  How many times did the clock strike?

- cêk ē tīaⁿ;

  but once.

- ŭ jîeh cōi ē?

  How many strokes were there?

- bô̤ kúi ē cĭu hô̤;

  done at a few strokes.

- úa thiaⁿ tîeh cōi-cōi ē;

  I heard it many times.

- lṳ́ táng úa cêk ē cē;

  wait for me an instant.

- thăi cò̤ cêk ē;

  wait for all to assemble.

- cò̤ cêk ē khîeh lâi;

  bring them all at once.

- cŭ cò̤ cêk ē;

  collected in one mass.

- kap cò̤ cêk ē;

  compiled in one.

- cò̤ cêk ē lâi khṳ̀;

  go all together.

- chŵn bô̤ thóiⁿ kù i cêk ē;

  paid no regard whatever to him.

**頻**
- Incessant; continually; repeatedly.

- i ē-ē lâi;

  he came again and again.

- i ē-ē pat khṳ̀ hṳ́-kò̤;

  he has been there time and again.

- ē-ē m̄ it-tit;

  am constantly forgetting it.

- i ē-ē pûah-lôh khṳ̀;

  he keeps falling down.