---
title: A Pronouncing and Defining Dictionary of the Swatow Dialect (汕頭方言音義字典) / ê
p: A_Pronouncing_and_Defining_Dictionary_of_the_Swatow_Dialect/w/ê
date: 2024-04-01 23:00:00
tags: 
- 汕頭方言音義字典
---


**浴**
- To bathe; to wash the body.

- sói-êk;

  to bathe.

- câng-êk;

  take a shower bath.

- phah-êk;

  a plunge bath.

- jṳ̂-êk;

  a sponge bath.

- sói-êk koiⁿ;

  a bath room.

- êk tn̂g;

  a bathing establishment.

- sói chìn cúi êk;

  bathe in cold water.

- lô̤h khoi khṳ̀ sói-êk;

  go to the river to bathe.

**液**
- The juices of the body.

- cin-êk;

  saliva.

- seⁿ cin-êk;

  produces saliva.

- chùi tèng bô̤ mih cin-êk;

  my mouth is rather dry.

**溢**
- To overflow; to run over.

- êk chut lâi;

  to overflow.

- khah múaⁿ cū àiⁿ êk tīo;

  if it is too full, it will run over.

- khîeh khṳ̀ pôk-pôk êk;

  spilled it as he went.

- màiⁿ êk cêk koiⁿ cúi;

  do not spill the water around.

- êk cêk sin cúi;

  spilled the water all over him.

- tê màiⁿ sai khah tĭⁿ cìaⁿ bŏi êk tīo;

  do not pour the teacups too full, then they will not run over.

**翼**
- Flanks or wings; assistants.

- ú-êk;

  adherents, supporters, helps, accomplices, aids.

- sĭ i kâi ú-êk;

  is his adherent.

- hun cò̤ có̤ ĭu êk;

  set apart as right and left hand supporters.

- có̤ êk tíeⁿ;

  chief of the staff.

- có̤-êk-cóng-piaⁿ;

  a Manchu lieutenant commander.

 

**譯**
- To interpret; to translate.

- êk ūe;

  to interpret speech.

- êk jī;

  to translate written passages.

- êk cṳ;

  translate books.

- hwn êk kuaⁿ;

  official interpreters.

- cang sai-kok ūe êk cò̤ tong-kok ūe;

  translate European languages into Chinese.

- cí kâi tī-hng bô̤ nâng ŏi êk ūe;

  there is no one here who can act as interpreter.

- cí kù ūe êk chut lâi sĭ cìeⁿ-seⁿ tàⁿ;

  this sentence is thus translated.

**腋**
- The arm-pits; the fur under the fore legs of animals.

- hû-êk khîu;

  a robe made from the fur under the legs of foxes.

- cîp êk sêng khîu;

  he collects bits of fur from under the legs of foxes to make his robe; he asks aid from everybody.

- cí īeⁿ îeh ŏi tī êk-hìuⁿ;

  this medicine will cure fetor of the arm-pits.

**易**
- To change; to exchange.

- kói-êk; pìen-êk;

  to change.

- kau-êk;

  to barter.

- bŏi î-êk;

  unchangeable.

- î-êk hong-sôk;

  modify the prevailing custom.

- seng-lí mòng-êk;

  trade is mutable.

- keng-êk ūi-chṳ̀;

  exchange locations.

**盪**
- To swash about.

- cúi êk lâi êk khṳ̀;

  the water swashes to and fro.

- taⁿ hó̤-hó̤, i cū bŏi hìeⁿ êk;

  carry it gently and then it will not swash over.

- pôk-pôk êk;

  to swash up and down, as water in a pail that is shaken.

**臆**
- The heart or breast, the thoughts, the feelings.

- êk-kìen;

  prejudices; notions; opinions biased by feelings.

- i sĭ pêng i kâi êk-kìen cū tó̤ kói-sueh;

  he explains it in accordance with his preconceived notions.

- cía sĭ kìe-cò̤ êk sueh, m̄sĭ tīaⁿ-tîeh cìeⁿ-seⁿ sueh;

  this may be called a whimsical exposition, it is not necessarily thus explained.

- cêk nâng kâi êk-tẁn būe ceok ûi cún;

  the judgment of one person is not sufficient to form a criterion.

**㑊**

- cîah-êk;

  a disease, in which there is a voracious appetite, while the patient grows thin: it is probably caused by tape-worm.

**億**
- A hundred thousands.

- câp bw̄n ûi êk;

  ten ten thousands are a hundred thousands.

- êk tĭo;

  myriads.