---
title: A Pronouncing and Defining Dictionary of the Swatow Dialect (汕頭方言音義字典) / ṳ
p: A_Pronouncing_and_Defining_Dictionary_of_the_Swatow_Dialect/w/ṳ
date: 2024-04-01 23:00:00
tags: 
- 汕頭方言音義字典
---

[↩️ 轉總目錄](/A_Pronouncing_and_Defining_Dictionary_of_the_Swatow_Dialect)


**恩**
- Favor, grace, mercy, kindness; benefits,  obligations; imperial favor; charitable; compassionate; to oblige, to  show favor to; partial to; heartfelt.

- ṳn-hŭi;

  grace.

- i kám i kâi ṳn;

  she excites his compassion.

- i sĭ bûang ṳn hŭ ngĭ kâi nâng;

  he is an ingrateful reprobate.

- khai ṳn;

  show mercy.

- cía sĭ ṳn-tíen khṳt i;

  this is showing him unmerited favor.

- i cò̤-nî ṳn ciang chiu pò̤?

  Why does he requite good with evil?

- cêng sĭu kùe i kâi ṳn;

  have experienced his kindness.

- sĭ i kâi tăi-ṳn-jîn;

  it is his benefactor.

- ŭ ṳn-cêk kîp peh-sèⁿ;

  has conferred great benefits upon the people.

- pò̤ i kâi ṳn;

  requite his kindness.

- sīa ṳn;

  show gratitude for favors.

- pò̤-tap sín ṳn;

  recompense divine favors.

- cí kâi ṳn tōa jû thiⁿ;

  this obligation cannot be expressed; the favor is great as the heavens.

- hûang ṳn;

  imperial favor.

- in ang cía ṳn-ài căi;

  they, the husband and wife, are very kind to each other.

- cía sĭ i kâi ṳn kong;

  this is his praiseworthy charity.

- môk ṳn tĭ-cṳ́;

  shower blessings on his followers.

**尹**
- A director or overseer of other officers.

- hú-ṳ́n;

  the Mayor of the Capital, a high officer whose  jurisdiction is independent of the provincial governor, and restricted  within the metropolitan prefecture.

- hú-ṳ́n pí kak séⁿ kâi hú tōa ho̤h cōi;

  the office of Mayor of the Capital is much higher than that of the provincial officers.

- seng-kiaⁿ ŭ cêk kâi hŏng-thien hú-ṳ́n;

  the Manchu capital has a mayor of the same rank as the mayor of Peking.

- i pat cò̤ kùe sŭn-thien hú-ṳu;

  he has been Mayor of Peking.

**隱**
- Retired; screened; covered; in private life; to keep out of view.

- ṳ́n kṳ suaⁿ lîm;

  to dwell in seclusion in the country.

- ṳ́n sṳ̆;

  a retired scholar, one never in office.

- ṳ́n gṳ́;

  an eliptical sentence.

- i ṳ́n-châng khì;

  she is very reticent.

- ṳ́n-ṳ́n thóiⁿ kìⁿ ŭ nâng lâi;

  made out with difficulty to perceive some person approaching.

- ṳ́n-ṳ́n thóiⁿ kìⁿ;

  saw indistinctly as in twilight or in thick fog.

- i ŏi ēng ṳ́n sin huap, sái kàu nâng thóiⁿ m̄ kìⁿ i;

  he knows how to apply the rules for rendering one's self invisible, so that people do not perceive him.